first_author: Wang, Boboila
journal: Neuron
last_author: Axel
modified: 20210504034008687
species: mice
tags: #cued-fear #association-cortex #learning #PFC
year: 2020


# 1 Line
Odor identity is stably represented in piriform cortex, then transiently encoded with valence during learning in the OFC, then stably represented as a valenced stimulus in mPFC.


# Key points
piriform receives seemingly randomly distributed odorant information -- how is visual cortex input organized? Is there a tonotopic to spatial correspondence?

CS+ is reward. Wonder if that fundamentally changes the process of representation of if appetitive and aversive learning are mediated similarly

piriform representation of odors does not change much with emotional learning. Similar to other early sensory cortex? (eg Te1, that does not change much with emotional learning)

piriform projects to OFC, and OFC changes representation from stimulus identity to stimulus valence. CS+ responses grow more similar, as do CS-, and CS+ and CS- representation grows further apart can use that in my task

changes in task rules suppress activity of CS+ ensemble, showing ability to re-learn and re-code valence

CS+ representation in OFC is strongest during early stages, within 3-4 days of learning, and then drops off, BUT behavioral performance remained high, indicating that OFC encoding of CS+ is only utilized during early stages

stimulus-outcome association happens in OFC, and after association is learned, discrimination happens elsewhere, and the OFC is no longer required. Two different phases of learning


# Summary
Piriform encodes odor stimulus identity, sending projections to multiple areas, including OFC and mPFC. OFC transiently learns the valence of representations, but stops encoding valence after a period of time. mPFC stably encodes a CS+ ensemble. OFC valence encoding likely reinforces inputs from piriform to mPFC to form a CS+ ensemble. 
Discrimination occurs in the mPFC, creating a separate CS- ensemble. Reward prediction error likely mediates the distinction between different stimuli, seperating out CS+ and CS- ensembles.

"In one model, during pretrain- ing, animals exposed to a single CS+ may learn that odor predicts reward through the emergence of a CS+ representation in the OFC. This CS+ representation in OFC may serve a teach- ing function in the mPFC at the initiation of discrimination learning and reinforce all piriform inputs onto the mPFC. Early in discrimination learning, all odors will therefore activate the mPFC CS+ ensemble and drive generalized licking behavior. When the animals experience odors that are not associated with reward (CS  ), a negative reward prediction error (RPE) signal may be generated by the failure of these odors to predict reward ( Schultz, 2016 ). This negative RPE signal is then relayed onto the mPFC to drive the formation of a CS  ensemble in the mPFC, distinct from the CS+ ensemble. In this manner, CS  odors will activate a distinct population of neurons in the mPFC that signals a negative value."

# Related papers
[[Auditory association cortex (Te2) activity is driven by emotional learning]]

[[Grewe...Schnitzer (2017) Nature. Neural ensemble dynamics underlying a long-term associative memory]]

[[Zhou...Schoenbaum (2020) Nature. Evolving schema representations in orbitofrontal ensembles during learning]]

[[Lesburgueres...Buontempi (2011) Science. Early tagging of cortical networks is required for the formation of enduring associative memory]]


# Open questions

* is representation of odor valence analagous to representation of other emotional, associative learning?
* what are the mechanisms of discrimination in mPFC? Is it really dopamine dependent?