tags: #rabies #tracing #circuit

[[rabies virus figure]]
{{rabies virus figure}}

Monosynaptic rabies tracing of inputs to Cre-expressing starter cells. Monosynaptic tracing with G-deleted rabies (RVdG) involves expression of the EnvA receptor, TVA, and rabies glycoprotein (G) in starter cells. These cells are subsequently infected specifically with EnvA + RVdG, which is trans-complemented by G to produce G + RVdG that spreads trans-synaptically to neurons providing synaptic input to starter cells. The spread of RVdG is monosynaptically restricted because the input cells lack G and G is required for trans-synaptic spread. In this example, the starter cells are selected on the basis of Cre expression in a mouse line expressing Cre in a cell type of interest. In the first step (1) a helper virus that expresses TVA, G, and a marker gene (RFP) in a Cre-dependent manner is injected in the location of desired starter cells. This results in expression of TVA, G, and RFP only in the Cre+ cells (green and red) (2). After a sufficient time for accumulation of TVA and G, EnvA + RVdG is injected in the location (3) and selectively infects the TVA+ starter cells. In this example the EnvA + RVdG contains the coding sequence for GFP resulting in GFP expression in the starter cells. The RVdG replicates in the starter cells and trans-complementation with G results in the production of G + RVdG that spreads trans-synaptically to input cells (4), which express GFP from the RV genome (green). The result is that starter cells are marked with both RFP and GFP while input cells express only GFP. Other neurons that do not express Cre and are not directly presynaptic to starter cells remain unlabeled (light yellow).